Start using a service – GOV.UK Design System

Cookies on GOV.UK Design System

We’d like to use analytics cookies so we can understand how you use the Design System and make improvements.

 We also use essential cookies to remember if you’ve accepted analytics cookies.

Accept analytics cookies

Reject analytics cookies
 
 View cookies

You’ve accepted analytics cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.

Hide cookie message

You’ve rejected analytics cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.

Hide cookie message

Skip to main content

Design System

Search Design system
 Sitemap

Menu

Get started 

Get started overview

Setup guides

Prototyping

Production

How to guides

Making labels and legends headings

Extending and modifying components in production

Understanding focus state styles

Using the updated type scale

Styles 

Styles overview

Page structure

Page template

Layout

Spacing

Section break

Typography

Typeface

Type scale

Headings

Paragraphs

Links

Lists

Font override classes

Visual elements

Colour

Images

Components 

Components overview

Accordion

Back link

Breadcrumbs

Button

Character count

Checkboxes

Cookie banner

Date input

Details

Error message

Error summary

Exit this page

Fieldset

File upload

Generic header

GOV.UK footer

GOV.UK header

Inset text

Notification banner

Pagination

Panel

Password input

Phase banner

Radios

Select

Service navigation

Skip link

Summary list

Table

Tabs

Tag

Task list

Text input

Textarea

Warning text

Patterns 

Patterns overview

Ask users for…

Addresses

Bank details

Dates

Email addresses

Equality information

Names

National Insurance numbers

Passwords

Payment card details

Phone numbers

Help users to…

Check a service is suitable

Check answers

Complete multiple tasks

Confirm a phone number

Confirm an email address

Contact a department or service team

Create a username

Create accounts

Exit a page quickly

Navigate a service

Recover from validation errors

Start using a service

Pages

Confirmation pages

Cookies page

Interruption pages

Page not found pages

Question pages

Service unavailable pages

Step by step navigation

There is a problem with the service pages

Community 

Community overview

What we’re working on

Upcoming components and patterns

Roadmap

What's new

Ways to get involved

Take part in our research

Share findings about your users

Propose a component or pattern

Develop a component or pattern

Propose a content change using GitHub

How we work

Community principles

Contribution criteria

Blog posts, videos and podcasts

Resources

Resources and tools

Events and workshops

Design System Day events

Code of Conduct

Accessibility 

Accessibility overview

Accessibility strategy

Pages in this section

 Ask users for…

Addresses

Bank details

Dates

Email addresses

Equality information

Names

National Insurance numbers

Passwords

Payment card details

Phone numbers

Help users to…

Check a service is suitable

Check answers

Complete multiple tasks

Confirm a phone number

Confirm an email address

Contact a department or service team

Create a username

Create accounts

Exit a page quickly

Navigate a service

Recover from validation errors

Start using a service

Pages

Confirmation pages

Cookies page

Interruption pages

Page not found pages

Question pages

Service unavailable pages

Step by step navigation

There is a problem with the service pages

Home

Patterns

Help users to
 
 Start using a service

GOV.UK services must start on a GOV.UK content page. This links your service to the rest of GOV.UK, and means that users can find it using search or through GOV.UK’s navigation.

When to use this pattern

Use this pattern to help you prototype a start point for your service, so you can test as much of the user journey as possible.

Public-facing UK government services need to start on a GOV.UK content page. The GDS content team creates these start points using GOV.UK publishing apps, separate from GOV.UK Frontend.

Service teams will need to agree content for this GOV.UK content page with the GDS content team. Read guidance on how to get your service on GOV.UK.

How it works

A service’s start point should:

give the user just enough information to help them understand what the service does and whether it will meet their need – including giving the service a name that reflects the problem it solves for users

include a ‘button’ linking into the service, with text that’s consistent with the action you’re asking users to take – for example, ‘Start now’, ‘Sign in’ or ‘Register or update your details’ (if you need a secondary call to action, use a standard link)

let users sign in, resume an application they’ve already started or update their details (if relevant)

include any other information that most users are likely to need before they start using the service online – for example, how much it costs to use the service and roughly how long it will take

include details of other ways to access the service – for example, by phone or by completing a paper form

You’ll also need to list any documents or information the user will need to help them complete the service (there’s no need to list information that a user is likely to know from memory – for example, their own date of birth).

You can list the documents or information at the start point, if it does not make the page too complicated. Or you can move these details to a separate ‘What you’ll need’ page, served within the service subdomain.

Eligibility

Avoid using the start point to provide complex eligibility information. Instead, ask questions inside the service to find out whether the user is eligible.

Read guidance on designing how GOV.UK content and transactions work together.

Choosing a format for a start point on GOV.UK

The options available depend on whether the start point will be published as ‘mainstream’ or ‘Whitehall’ content.

Mainstream content is content aimed at the general public – or at meeting business needs that are not sector-specific.

The content team at GDS is responsible for creating mainstream start points on GOV.UK, as with other mainstream content. They’ll work with you to make sure the journey from GOV.UK into the service works as well as possible. It’s a good idea to talk to your organisation’s content team during alpha – if necessary, they can put you in touch with the team at GDS.

Mainstream start points

For a mainstream start point, the options are:

a simple start page

a start point within a multipart guide

Use a simple start page if users can start using the service without needing much context.

If the start point is linked to a wider process that needs more explanation, create an ‘Apply’ section within a multipart guide.

For example, for a user to prove their right to work in the UK, they need to understand which documents they’ll need and how to show them to an employer. This depends on their nationality, what kind of permission they have to work in the UK and types of documents they’ve been issued with. Some users have the option of getting a ‘share code’ by entering their documents online. There are some specific schemes which use different documents.

It’s important that users have this context, so it makes sense to embed the start point within the multipart guide – rather than creating the start point as a separate start page, allowing users to miss the context and potentially do the wrong thing.

Read a blog post about how DWP’s digital team found that providing a start page within a multipart guide for Carer’s Allowance improved the journey for users.

Creating a start point using Whitehall Publisher

For non-mainstream services, publishers in departments with access to the ‘Whitehall’ app can create a simple start page using the ‘detailed guide’ format.

Use this Markdown to create a button within a detailed guide:

{button start}[Button text goes here](https://servicename.service.gov.uk/first-page-within-service){/button}

Help improve this pattern

To help make sure that this page is useful, relevant and up to date, you can:

take part in the
 
 ‘Start using a service’ discussion on GitHub
 
 and share your research

propose a change on GitHub
 – read more about
 
 how to propose changes in GitHub

Need help?

If you’ve got a question about the GOV.UK Design System, contact the team.

Back to top

Support links

Accessibility statement

Sitemap

Cookies

Privacy

Contact the team

Built by the GOV.UK Design System team

All content is available under the
 Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated

© Crown copyright
