Using color | U.S. Web Design System (USWDS)

Skip to main content

An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know

Here’s how you know

Official websites use .gov
A
 .gov website belongs to an official government
 organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
 lock (
 ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
 the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
 secure websites.

USWDS
 U.S. Web Design System (USWDS)

Menu

How to use USWDS

How to use USWDS

Getting started for developers

Getting started for designers

Documentation

Settings

USWDS maturity model

Accessibility

Performance guidelines

Code guidelines

Migrating to USWDS 3.0

Migrating to USWDS 2.0

Implementations

Showcase

Sample contract language for 21st Century IDEA

Website standards

Design principles

Components

Components

Accordion

Alert

Banner

Breadcrumb

Button

Button group

Card

Character count

Checkbox

Collection

Combo box

Data visualizations

Date picker

Date range picker

File input

Footer

Form

Grid

Header

Icon

Icon list

Identifier

In-page navigation

Input mask

Input prefix/suffix

Language selector

Link

List

Memorable date

Modal

Pagination

Process list

Prose

Radio buttons

Range slider

Search

Select

Side navigation

Site alert

Step indicator

Summary box

Table

Tag

Text input

Time picker

Tooltip

Typography

Validation

Patterns

Patterns

Introducing patterns

Create a user profile

Complete a complex form

Select a language

Design tokens

Design tokens

Color

Using color

Introduction

Accessibility

USWDS color wheels

Color guidance

Further reading

Tools

Latest updates

Theme color tokens

State color tokens

System color tokens

Typesetting

Flex

Opacity

Order

Shadow

Spacing units

Z-index

Utilities

Utilities

Layout grid

Color

Height and width

Margin and padding

Border

Outline

Font size and family

Text styles

Paragraph styles

Display

Flex

Shadow

Float

Clearfix

List reset

Templates

Templates

404 page

Documentation page

Landing page

Authentication pages

Form templates

About

About

Key benefits

Product values

Contribute

Community

What’s new

Monthly calls

Product roadmap

Research

Security

Website policies and notices

How to use USWDS

Design principles

Components

Patterns

Design tokens

Utilities

Templates

About

Search

Read website standards

Download v3.14.0

View on GitHub

Design tokens

Color

Using color

Introduction

Accessibility

USWDS color wheels

Color guidance

Further reading

Tools

Latest updates

Theme color tokens

State color tokens

System color tokens

Typesetting

Flex

Opacity

Order

Shadow

Spacing units

Z-index

Design tokens

Using color

Color is a practical and emotional tool. It conveys personality, sets a tone, attracts attention, and indicates importance.

Introduction

USWDS organizes its color tokens into theme tokens, state tokens, and System tokens. System tokens are the complete set of colors available from USWDS. Project tokens are a smaller, role-based subset customized to your project’s individual identity, tone, and needs. This subset of tokens will use only a few color families from the 24 color families available in the set of System tokens.

Use USWDS color tokens, and avoid custom colors whenever possible. Creating coherent government sites and services helps provide a good user experience to the public. Of course, your mission, project needs, and user needs always come first, but if you plan to contribute your work back into the system — which helps the system learn, adapt, and improve — that work will need to conform to system standards and use USWDS’s design tokens.

Color, color family, and grade

Throughout our documentation and guidance, we’ll use the terms “color,” “color family,” and “grade” — but what do we mean when we use them?

Color is any specific swatch in our system color token palette, like red-50, green-cool-10, or indigo-warm-60v.

Color family is a group of colors that all have the same hue on a color wheel (refer to USWDS color wheels). Each contains a number of individual colors, distinguished from each other by the brightness or saturation. A System token’s color family typically has a conventional color name, like red or blue-warm, and a theme token’s color family has a role-based name, like primary.

Grade is a way to express how light or dark a color is. USWDS uses a 100-point scale to communicate a color token’s grade, where 0 is pure white and 100 is pure black. We’ve regularized these grades across color families; a color of grade 50 in one color family should be the same level of lightness as a color of grade 50 in another color family. This feature of USWDS has important color-contrast and accessibility implications, which we discuss in the subsequent sections on accessibility.

Color and accessibility

Color is a powerful tool with an unreliable impact — its effects are neither consistent nor predictable across a population. Per NIH, color insensitivity impacts approximately 0.5% of adult women and 8% of adult men (4.5% of the total population). Color insensitivity can make it difficult to distinguish hues (red–green color blindness is the most common form), and some rare conditions prevent the perception of hue altogether. Commonplace vision problems like nearsightedness and astigmatism (among others) also affect how well folks perceive color and contrast.

Accessibility is not a special case. In the second quarter of 2018, sites using USWDS topped 1.4 billion pageviews. 4.5% of 1.4 billion is around 60 million pageviews — when it comes to accessibility, thinking broadly and inclusively isn’t just a good idea, it’s our mission and responsibility.

Section 508, which aligns with WCAG 2.0 Level AA, sets the legal standard for the needed contrast level between text and its background. The baseline AA contrast standard is 4.5:1 for most text and 3:1 for large text (19px+ bold or 24px+ normal text).

Accessible color pairings

USWDS helps teams choose accessible colors with a color-grade system. The following figure represents the gray color family in grades 5–90:

5

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

Each color family has 10 grades, which fall between 5 and 90. Pure white is the equivalent of grade 0, and pure black is the equivalent of grade 100.

Magic number

We call the difference in grade between any two colors the magic number. Magic numbers have the following contrast implications:

A magic number of 40+ results in WCAG 2.0 AA Large Text contrast (example: gray-90 and indigo-warm-50v).

 A magic number of 50+ results in WCAG 2.0 AA contrast or AAA Large Text contrast (example: gray-90 and red-40).

 A magic number of 70+ results in WCAG 2.0 AAA contrast (example: gray-10 and red-80).

 Colors of grade 50 result in Section 508 AA contrast against both pure white (grade 0) and pure black (grade 100).

Use magic numbers to choose accessible color combinations from any palette and color family.

Magic numbers work because each grade conforms to a specific range of values for relative luminance. WCAG and Section 508 color contrast is calculated as a ratio of the relative luminances of two colors, so as long as our colors fall between a specific luminance range for each grade, the ratio will conform to contrast requirements. The following table shows each grade and the corresponding luminance minimum and maximum.

grade
 minimum luminance
 maximum luminance

0
 1.000
 1.000

5
 0.850
 0.930

10
 0.750
 0.820

20
 0.500
 0.650

30
 0.350
 0.450

40
 0.225
 0.300

50
 0.175
 0.183

60
 0.100
 0.125

70
 0.050
 0.070

80
 0.020
 0.040

90
 0.005
 0.015

100
 0.000
 0.000

Accessible color combination examples

The following two images are examples of accessible color combinations. In this first image, the background color is gray-90. To get a magic number of at least 50 and, thus, ensure a Section 508 AA contrast level, the text color must be grade 40 or below. Grades of 50 and below would be acceptable for large text.

The color grade system works across color families as shown in this second image.

Color, contrast, and readability

Readability is the ease with which a reader can understand a written text. It’s a complicated phenomenon affected by many factors in addition to color and contrast, including (but not limited to) type size, typeface, line length, line height, whitespace, word choice, content design, and writing style. Readability issues can be especially important for sites that contain documentation or detailed text that requires concentration.

When it comes to color, consider these general guidelines:

Section 508 AA+ color contrast helps colorblindness and color perception.

 Avoiding pure black text on a white background helps dyslexia, Irlen Syndrome, light sensitivity, and autism.

 The best combination is the maximum color contrast of white or light text on black or dark background because it seems to visually work well for all.

 The best option, when possible, is to provide a way for users to select their own text and background colors.

USWDS color wheels

The following color wheels are a way to visualize the entire System palette and its color-family naming rubric. The color wheels are arranged around the 360 degrees of the HSL color model. Each color family is labelled with its position (in degrees) on this model. In general, colors within color families stay close to the hue value listed, but it is a custom palette, not generated by an algorithm. Hue variation within color families is intentional — we are trying to find good colors, not just those that fit a function.

The following image shows our standard System tokens wheel.

The following image shows our vivid System tokens wheel.

General color guidance

If we use color intentionally, consistently, and sensitively, it can make a big difference in the way people understand and connect with our pages, our products and services, and our message. Color is an important component of visual and emotional cognition, and that’s precisely what makes it difficult to use well — what’s strong and confident to one person can be jarring or alarming to another.

Start in black and white. Start with your core message and use type scale and hierarchy to test and refine its effectiveness. Then, introduce color to support that message. Color can overwhelm interpretation, and since approximately 4.5% of the population has some kind of color insensitivity, it’s important to convey your message without relying on color.

Put the practical before the emotional. Because color can do so much, it’s helpful to keep focused. Limit the complexity of color by concentrating on functional requirements (like status states or directions) first. Then, use color as progressive enhancement to reinforce or balance the emotional needs of the content. Even so, bear in mind that the effects of color are often personal and cultural as much as, or more so than, physiological. Understand that using color to optimize for tone necessarily excludes some users in subtle and not-so-subtle ways.

Use mood boards for guidance. Deriving appropriate color palettes can be challenging, and letting existing colors and palettes be your guide makes sense. Collect images from other sources that evoke the desired tone to find commonalities. Then, find close matches in the system palette to help build your theme.

Ask visual designers. Your group or agency may have visual designers either on staff or available as contractors. They can be an invaluable resource for building palettes or getting feedback on existing ones. USWDS benefits from the collective experience of visual designers across agencies to build our System palette and provide a range of prebuilt project theme palettes. If you have visual design resources, use them.

Don’t use color exclusively to convey meaning. Even Section 508 conformant contrast doesn’t ensure that colors are distinguishable for a significant percentage of your audience. Approximately 0.5% of adult women and 8% of adult men have some kind of color insensitivity, especially between red and green. Color should only be used as progressive enhancement — if color is the only signal, that signal won’t get through as intended to everyone.

Further reading

Accessibility: Color and contrast
https://digital.gov/guides/accessibility-for-teams/visual-design#color-and-contrast

 Color and readability
https://www.w3.org/WAI/RD/2012/text-customization/r11

 Improving accessibility for colorblind users
https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2016/06/improving-color-accessibility-for-color-blind-users/

 Introduction to Irlen Syndrome
https://irlen.com/what-is-irlen-syndrome/

 Making content accessible for those with dyslexia
https://www.dyslexic.com/blog/quick-guide-making-content-accessible/

 W3C: Contrast levels for readability
https://www.w3.org/WAI/test-evaluate/preliminary/#contrast

 W3C: Gap analysis of the state of accessibility for people with learning disabilities and cognitive disabilities
https://www.w3.org/TR/coga-gap-analysis/

 W3C: Low vision needs
https://www.w3.org/TR/low-vision-needs/

Tools

USWDS Color Tool from CivicActions: Convert any hex color into its closest USWDS equivalent
https://civicactions.github.io/uswds-color-tool

Latest updates
Meaningful code and guidance updates are listed in the following table:

Date
 USWDS version
 Affects
 Breaking
 Description

2022-06-03

N/A

Guidance

No

Updated the minimum luminance for color grade 40.

More information:
 
 uswds-site#1631

2021-12-29

N/A

Guidance

No

Added tools section.

More information:
 
 uswds-site#1276

Was this page helpful?

Become part of the community

USWDS is an active open source community of government engineers, content specialists, and designers. Our contributors both in and out of government support dozens of agencies and nearly 200 sites.

Have an idea or an issue?

 Reach out in GitHub

Engage with the community

 Find a channel that works for you

Subscribe to our newsletter

 Sign up for USWDS updates

Get support

 Email the USWDS team

Looking for USWDS v1 documentation?
 Visit v1.designsystem.digital.gov

designsystem.digital.gov

 An official website of the General Services Administration

About GSA

Accessibility statement

FOIA requests

No FEAR Act data

Office of the Inspector General

Performance reports

Privacy policy

Looking for U.S. government information and services?

Visit USA.gov
