Accessibility | U.S. Web Design System (USWDS)

Skip to main content

An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know

Here’s how you know

Official websites use .gov
A
 .gov website belongs to an official government
 organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
 lock (
 ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to
 the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
 secure websites.

USWDS
 U.S. Web Design System (USWDS)

Menu

How to use USWDS

How to use USWDS

Getting started for developers

Getting started for designers

Documentation

Settings

USWDS maturity model

Accessibility

We follow the four principles of accessibility

We address user needs

We include accessibility in all phases of our process

What project teams should do

Accessibility resources

Latest updates

Performance guidelines

Code guidelines

Migrating to USWDS 3.0

Migrating to USWDS 2.0

Implementations

Showcase

Sample contract language for 21st Century IDEA

Website standards

Design principles

Components

Components

Accordion

Alert

Banner

Breadcrumb

Button

Button group

Card

Character count

Checkbox

Collection

Combo box

Data visualizations

Date picker

Date range picker

File input

Footer

Form

Grid

Header

Icon

Icon list

Identifier

In-page navigation

Input mask

Input prefix/suffix

Language selector

Link

List

Memorable date

Modal

Pagination

Process list

Prose

Radio buttons

Range slider

Search

Select

Side navigation

Site alert

Step indicator

Summary box

Table

Tag

Text input

Time picker

Tooltip

Typography

Validation

Patterns

Patterns

Introducing patterns

Create a user profile

Complete a complex form

Select a language

Design tokens

Design tokens

Color

Typesetting

Flex

Opacity

Order

Shadow

Spacing units

Z-index

Utilities

Utilities

Layout grid

Color

Height and width

Margin and padding

Border

Outline

Font size and family

Text styles

Paragraph styles

Display

Flex

Shadow

Float

Clearfix

List reset

Templates

Templates

404 page

Documentation page

Landing page

Authentication pages

Form templates

About

About

Key benefits

Product values

Contribute

Community

What’s new

Monthly calls

Product roadmap

Research

Security

Website policies and notices

How to use USWDS

Design principles

Components

Patterns

Design tokens

Utilities

Templates

About

Search

Read website standards

Download v3.14.0

View on GitHub

How to use USWDS

Getting started for developers

Getting started for designers

Documentation

Settings

USWDS maturity model

Accessibility

We follow the four principles of accessibility

We address user needs

We include accessibility in all phases of our process

What project teams should do

Accessibility resources

Latest updates

Performance guidelines

Code guidelines

Migrating to USWDS 3.0

Migrating to USWDS 2.0

Implementations

Showcase

Sample contract language for 21st Century IDEA

Website standards

How to use USWDS

Accessibility

Usability for every ability

The U.S. Web Design System is built on a foundation of accessibility. Our foundation was created with and for our colleagues who develop digital services for all Americans.

While we strive for excellence, we realize nothing can or will ever be 100% accessible. Therefore, we’ll continuously be adapting and revisiting this accessibility strategy and seeking community input to continue improving.

We follow the four principles of accessibility

Perceivable: Users must be able to perceive the information presented.

 Operable: Users must be able to operate the interface.

 Understandable: Users must be able to understand both how the user interface operates and the meaning of information presented.

 Robust: Users must be able to access the content as technologies advance. As technologies like browsers and other assistive technology evolve, the content should remain accessible.

These four principles are the foundation of Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 requirements, amended in 1998 to require federal agencies to make their electronic and information technology accessible to people with disabilities. In 2018, Section 508 incorporated the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0 Level AA success criteria.

Even though 2.0 Level AA is the baseline of conformance for legal compliance, USWDS works to achieve the higher standard of WCAG 2.1 AA, which also meets legal requirements, to better serve everyone. In October, 2023 WCAG 2.2 was released. WCAG 2.2 is not required for legal compliance right now, but we strive to achieve as many of the latest success criteria as we can, and intend to incrementally work toward AAA compliance.

To demonstrate how U.S. Web Design System components meet these requirements, we’ve used the Voluntary Product Accessibility Template (VPAT®) 2.5 (revised in November 2023) to create an accessibility conformance report (ACR): USWDS accessibility conformance report (ACR) in .docx format. For this report, we assessed 44 components of USWDS 3.11.0 in March 2025 and published the report in May 2025.

We test our work. You need to test yours.

The work we do acts as a foundation for you to implement on your own projects. However, to ensure full WCAG compliance, you need to conduct your own research and testing.

We address user needs

Accessibility guidelines help us address specific, ability-based patterns of user experience (UX). USWDS builds these baseline UX needs into its design language, components, guidance, and layouts. We’ve listed some examples below.

Real-life users may cross categories. For example, depending on their task, limited-vision users may use either screen readers or screen magnifiers. People with cognitive differences and neurodiverse individuals benefit from many of the guidelines listed below.

Visually impaired and blind users

Support screen readers and other assistive technology like braille displays

 Outline semantic landmarks and regions

 Ensure all content has clear context and labeling

 Provide text equivalents for visual resources

 Announce updates of page state changes

 Ensure keyboard focus follows a logical and predictable pattern

 Never use visual elements alone to convey meaning

 Include descriptions of videos

Limited-vision users

Design for readability

 Design large, easy-to-select interaction targets

 Allow layouts to respond to user zoom settings and screen magnifiers

 Design with linear layouts

 Don’t rely on hover to communicate critical information

 Use legible visual contrast

 Don’t use color alone to convey meaning

 Allow for customization of fonts and contrast styles

Deaf users

Provide an accurate text equivalent for audio resources

 Don’t convey meaning through audio alone

Limited-mobility users

Support keyboard-only (linear) functionality

 Support touchscreen (direct input) functionality

 Design large, easy-to-select readability and interaction targets

 Prefer linear layouts

 Don’t rely on hover for critical information

Sensory-sensitive users

Keep layouts simple

 Avoid flashing and repetitive animation

 Avoid very high color contrast

 Avoid alarming colors and images

 Avoid audio and video that start automatically

 Allow a user to pause or stop content on their own

We include accessibility in all phases of our process

USWDS provides accessible components, the guidance to implement these components, and the tools to customize and extend the design system’s accessibility.

As we grow our user research practice to include testing with more people with disabilities we will include user-specific recommendations.

Accessibility requirements may be relatively static, but accessibility itself is as dynamic and open-ended as any human-centered design process.

We deliver accessible components

Test with screen readers (VoiceOver, JAWS)

 Test with keyboard-only navigation

 Test with browser zoom magnification

 Test with touch-only interaction

 Test across browsers and operating systems

 Collect community feedback

 Scan with automated tools, like pa11y and aXe, on every code change. If it doesn’t pass, we don’t merge the code

 Review regular reports from site-scanning tools such as SiteImprove or AMP to quickly remediate accessibility issues

 Manually test components and functionality with experienced accessibility specialists

 Provide conformance status on each component (in progress)

 Conduct ongoing accessibility audits

We provide guidance on how to implement our components accessibly

Include accessibility guidance on our website’s component pages

 Provide custom accessibility checks and plain language guides to test in your own environment (in progress)

We include accessibility-focused tools to build new functionality

Colors with magic number contrast

 Rem-based size tokens and an em-based media query mixin that respond to user scale settings

 Normalized typography tokens that provide reliable, readable results regardless of the typeface

We feature context-aware settings that allow accessible customization with minimal custom code

Adding more smart components that change their color based on background

 Smart settings for links to automatically choose accessible link and hover states

We make accessibility one of our core design principles

We strive not only to embrace accessibility but also to inspire all federal web teams to embrace it, too.

 We prioritize accessibility issues. We work hard to fix accessibility-related issues quickly, and to get them into the next available release. Our developers work with our accessibility specialists to review fixes with automated and manual testing.

While we conduct research during the design and development of components, it is impossible to predict every use case for accessibility and usability. That is why we encourage you to contribute to the community by providing feedback on how a component is working on your site. We also expect you to perform your own user testing at the page level to gauge the usability of a component within context. We welcome any and all findings and feedback.

What project teams should do

Building with accessible USWDS components does not guarantee an accessible service. You need to keep testing to stay accessible.

We recommend a mix of automated, semi-automated, and manual testing in addition to actual tests with real people who need assistive accommodations to interact with services effectively.

Government usability testing resources

Usability testing on Digital.gov [digital.gov]

 Getting started with usability testing [digital.gov]

 Testing for plain-language usability [plainlanguage.gov]

 18F’s collection of human-centered design tools [guides.18f.gov]

Accessibility resources

Government accessibility resources

The Section 508 accessibility program [section508.gov]

 Accessibility for Teams guide [digital.gov]

 Find your Section 508 Coordinator [section508.gov]

 Section 508 ICT Testing Baseline [section508coordinators.github.com ]

 Learn about writing in plain language [plainlanguage.gov]

 Plain language resources [plainlanguage.gov]

 18F’s accessibility guide [accessibility.18f.gov]

 Accessibility Requirements Tool (ART) for contracting [section508.gov]

 Understanding universal design [section508.gov]

Non-government accessibility resources

Web Accessibility Perspectives Videos [w3.org]

 Inclusive design principles [inclusivedesignprinciples.info]

 Accessibility fundamentals with Rob Dodson [youtube.com]

 Microsoft’s inclusive design manual [microsoft.com]

 Inclusive components by Heydon Pickering [inclusive-components.design]

 Humane by design [humanebydesign.com]

Practical actions

Humanize accessibility. Seek out examples of the real-life impact of accessible products and services. Try to make accessibility less abstract and more personal.

 Use agency resources. Reach out to your agency’s accessibility team and build a relationship with them.

 Learn about assistive technology. Get familiar with the basic ways people use assistive technology and how people with disabilities use the web.

 Follow existing standards. Conform to the Revised 508 Standards and WCAG 2.0.

 Work from existing resources. Consult Section508.gov, Accessibility for Teams, and the 18F Accessibility Guide.

 Design generously. Adopt an inclusive design mentality.

 Develop accessible code. Ensure front-end code is written accessibly and conducts manual and automated testing.

 Write accessible content. Ensure content is written in plain language and headings, images, and links are accurately labeled.

 Build accessible designs. Ensure that designs are accessible, pages are laid out in a logical order, and content meets color contrast requirements.

 Test broadly. Test with a broad range of users and abilities throughout the design and development process, including manual accessibility testing against the Trusted Tester and ICT Testing Baseline.

 Be responsive. Remediate accessibility issues when you discover them.

 Contract for accessibility. Use the Accessibility Requirements Tool (ART) to incorporate accessibility requirements into your contracts.

Key accessibility considerations

Can users easily interpret content associated with graphic elements?

 Can users easily understand and complete key tasks?

 Are you testing your service with a broad range of users?

 Do you know your agency accessibility team?

 Is your site organized such that everyone can navigate it easily?

 Are you using accessibility testing tools?

 Did your accessibility testing tools provide accurate results?

 Are you providing content in languages other than English, as appropriate for the audience?

Latest updates
Meaningful code and guidance updates are listed in the following table:

Date

Description

2025-06-02

Published our new USWDS component Accessibility Conformance Report (ACR) / Voluntary Product Accessibility Template (VPAT®).

More information:
 
 uswds-site#3162

2024-03-29

Updated all page content.

More information:
 
 uswds-site#2561

2021-05-20

Added new accessibility guidance and resources.

More information:
 
 uswds-site#1230

Was this page helpful?

Become part of the community

USWDS is an active open source community of government engineers, content specialists, and designers. Our contributors both in and out of government support dozens of agencies and nearly 200 sites.

Have an idea or an issue?

 Reach out in GitHub

Engage with the community

 Find a channel that works for you

Subscribe to our newsletter

 Sign up for USWDS updates

Get support

 Email the USWDS team

Looking for USWDS v1 documentation?
 Visit v1.designsystem.digital.gov

designsystem.digital.gov

 An official website of the General Services Administration

About GSA

Accessibility statement

FOIA requests

No FEAR Act data

Office of the Inspector General

Performance reports

Privacy policy

Looking for U.S. government information and services?

Visit USA.gov
